vignette data (#990)
insightsengineering/teal: vignettes/including-data-in-teal-applications.Rmd

---
title: "Including Data in teal Applications"
author: "NEST CoreDev"
output: 

>   bookdown::html_document2:

Reviewer: why bookdown needed?

Author: > * added `bookdown` to `Suggests` to allow for cross-references within document

Reviewer: Can't you do it with pure markdown syntax https://linuxhint.com/markdown-link-section/?

```
(jump to [`teal_data` properties](#teal-data-properties))
```

```
(back to [Reproducible data](#reproducible-data))
```

Author: Apparently I can.

See `?eval_code` for more details.

Note that with `data` the code that created the data objects is unknown so the process cannot be reproduced.
The necessary code can be added with the `code` argument of the `teal_data` function but in that case the code may not reproduce the environment.
Such an object is considered _unverified_ (jump to [`teal_data` properties]).

If reproducibility is required, we recommend creating `teal_data` empty and evaluating code.

###### code from file

The ability to pass code as character vector to `eval_code` opens the door to using code stored in a file.
```{r, eval=FALSE}
# not run
data_from_file <- teal_data()
data_from_file <- eval_code(data, readLines("<path_to_file>"))
```

### Creating Data In-App

The one departure from passing a `teal_data` object to `init` is when the data does not exist in the environment where the app is run, _e.g._ when it has to be pulled from a remote source.
In those cases a `teal_data_module` must be used.
See [this vignette](data-as-shiny-module.html) for a detailed description.

<br>

## Clinical Data

Currently `teal` supports two specialized data formats.

### `ADaM` Data

> The container used for `CDISC` data is the `cdisc_data` class, which is an extension of `teal_data` created with the `cdisc_data` function.

Reviewer: There is no `cdisc_data` class❗

Target for teal is to be data-standard independent and we are very close to achieve this. At this moment `teal.data` supports every kind of data. It is only `teal.slice` and `teal.transform` which really blocks us to announce this wonderful news ;]

```suggestion
For `CDISC` data we recommend to create `teal_data` object using `cdisc_data()` function, which adds default `join_keys` to set proper relationships with `ADSL` dataset.
```

  join_key("DS1", "DS2", keys = c("group" = "group"))
)
data_relational1 <- teal_data(DS1 = ds1, DS2 = ds2, join_keys = keys)
data_relational2 <- teal_data(DS1 = ds1, DS2 = ds2)
join_keys(data_relational2) <- keys
```

For a detailed explanation of join keys, see [this `teal.data` vignette](https://insightsengineering.github.io/teal.data/latest-tag/articles/join-keys.html).

(back to [`ADaM` Data])

##### `verified`

`teal_data` allows for tracking code from data creation through filtering through analysis so that the whole process can be reproduced.
The `verified` property designates whether or not reproducibility has been confirmed.
`teal_data` objects that are created empty and are only modified by evaluating code in them are verified by default.
Ones created with data objects alone or with data objects and code are not verified by default but can become verified by running the `verify` function.

```{r}
data_with_code

data_with_objects_and_code <- teal_data(iris = iris, cars = mtcars, code = expression(iris <- iris, cars <- mtcars))
data_with_objects_and_code

data_with_objects_and_code_verified <- verify(data_with_objects_and_code)
data_with_objects_and_code_verified
```

> For a detailed explanation of verification, see [this `teal.data` vignette](https://insightsengineering.github.io/teal.data/latest-tag/articles/teal-data.html).

Reviewer: Let's refer to this https://github.com/insightsengineering/teal.data/blob/refactor/vignettes/teal-data-reproducibility.Rmd

```suggestion
For a detailed explanation of verification, see [the "`teal.data` reproducibility" vignette](https://insightsengineering.github.io/teal.data/latest-tag/articles/teal-data-reproducibility.html).
```
